Step 1: Select Your Operating System (OS)

Task: Download and Install Windows 11.

    Go to the Windows 11 download page: Windows 11 Download.
    Download the installation media: Click on "Download Now" under "Create Windows 11 Installation Media."
    Create a bootable USB drive:
        Insert a USB flash drive with at least 8GB of space into your computer.
        Download and run the Windows 11 Media Creation Tool.
        Follow the prompts to create a bootable USB drive.
    Boot from the USB drive:
        Restart your computer and boot from the USB drive (you may need to change the boot order in the BIOS/UEFI settings).
        Follow the on-screen instructions to install Windows 11.

Step 2: Install a Text Editor or Integrated Development Environment (IDE)

Task: Download and Install Visual Studio Code.

    Go to the Visual Studio Code download page: VS Code Download.
    Choose the installer for Windows: Click on the appropriate download link for your operating system.
    Run the installer:
        Follow the prompts to complete the installation.
        Choose any additional options or settings as needed.

Step 3: Set Up Version Control System

Task: Install Git and configure it on your local machine. Create a GitHub account, initialize a Git repository, and make your first commit.

    Go to the Git download page: Git Download.
    Download and install Git: Follow the default settings during installation.
    Configure Git identity:
        Open Git Bash.
        Run the following commands:

        bash

    git config --global user.name "Molebane"
    git config --global user.email "molebanemolebane@gmail.com"

Create a GitHub account: GitHub.
Create a new repository:

    Go to your GitHub profile and click "New Repository."
    Follow the prompts to set up your repository.

Clone the repository to your local machine:

bash

git clone https://github.com/your-username/your-repository.git
cd your-repository

Create a new file, add it to the repository, and commit your changes:

bash

    echo "# My First Commit" > README.md
    git add README.md
    git commit -m "Initial commit"
    git push origin main

Step 4: Install Necessary Programming Languages and Runtimes

Task: Install Python.

    Go to the Python download page: Python Download.
    Download the latest version of Python for Windows.
    Run the installer:
        Check the option "Add Python to PATH."
        Follow the prompts to complete the installation.
    Verify the installation:
        Open Command Prompt and type:

        bash

        python --version

Step 5: Install Package Managers

Task: Install pip.

    Verify the installation of pip:
        Open Command Prompt and type:

        bash

        pip --version

Step 6: Configure a Database (MySQL)

Task: Download and install MySQL.

    Go to the MySQL download page: MySQL Installer.
    Download the MySQL Installer for Windows.
    Run the installer:
        Choose the "Developer Default" setup.
        Follow the prompts to complete the installation.
        Configure the root account and password.
    Verify the installation:
        Open MySQL Command Line Client.
        Log in with your root password.

Step 7: Set Up Development Environments and Virtualization (Optional)

Task: Consider using Docker.

    Go to the Docker download page: Docker Desktop.
    Download and install Docker Desktop for Windows.
    Follow the prompts to complete the installation.
    Verify the installation:
        Open Command Prompt and type:

        bash

        docker --version

Step 8: Explore Extensions and Plugins

Task: Explore available extensions for Visual Studio Code.

    Open Visual Studio Code.
    Go to the Extensions view:
        Click the Extensions icon in the Activity Bar on the side of the window.
    Search for and install extensions:
        Python (by Microsoft)
        GitLens
        Prettier - Code formatter
        ESLint

Step 9: Document Your Setup

Task: Create a comprehensive document outlining the steps taken to set up your developer environment.

    Open a new document in your preferred word processor.
    Write detailed, step-by-step instructions for each task:
        Include screenshots where necessary.
        Include configurations and customizations.
        Document any troubleshooting steps encountered.
    Save your document.

Deliverables

    Setup Documentation: A document detailing the setup process.
    GitHub Repository: A repository containing a sample project initialized with Git and any necessary configuration files (e.g., .gitignore).
    Reflection: A section in your documentation reflecting on the challenges faced and solutions employed during the setup process.

Additional Tips

    Backup Your System: Before making major changes, it’s always a good idea to back up your system.
    Use Virtual Machines: If you want to experiment without affecting your main system, consider using virtual machines (e.g., VirtualBox).
    Stay Updated: Regularly check for updates to your tools and dependencies to keep your development environment secure and efficient.
    Join Communities: Engage with communities (e.g., Stack Overflow, GitHub Discussions) for support and to stay current with best practices.